Blog: Windows HostProcess containers going to stable (#37370)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2022-12-12-host-process-containers-stable/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.26: Windows HostProcess Containers Are Going Stable"
date: 2022-12-13
slug: host-process-containers-stable
---

**Authors**: Mark Rossetti (Microsoft) and Brandon Smith (Microsoft)

The long-awaited day has arrived: HostProcess containers, the Windows equivalent to Linux privileged
containers, has finally made it to **GA in Kubernetes 1.26**!

Let's recap - what are HostProcess containers and why are they useful? Cluster operators
are often faced with the need to configure their nodes upon provisioning. Whether it's
installing services, certificates, network configs, device plugins, or even monitoring solutions like

> prometheus, HostProcess containers enable you to it all with minimal effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installing Windows services, configuring keys and certificates for TLS, managing network configurations, providing a [device plugin](/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/device-plugins/),
or even deploying monitoring tools such as a Prometheus exporter, HostProcess containers
enable you to do it all with minimal effort.
```

Author: I will update this to say `configuring registry keys` once i commit the original suggestion.

> You can create your own ultra-thin HostProcess container image to be run directly as

Author: Let me update this

> a process on the host directly after spinning up a new node. All you need to do is define

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a process on the host directly after creating up a new windows node. You can now package your powershell scripts
```

Author: up should be removed too

> and test your administrative workload once, package it into a container, and have Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it into a container, and have Kubernetes
```

deploy the workload automatically. It removes the need to exec into the node or configure

> VMSS extensions to perform these administrative actions. You get all the benefits of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your cloud provider's virtual machine management tooling to perform these administrative actions.
You get all the benefits of
```

containerized packaging and deployment methods combined with a reduction in both administrative
and development cost.

> HostProcess containers differ quite significantly from regular Windows Server containers.

Reviewer: Optionally:
```suggestion
[HostProcess containers](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/create-hostprocess-pod/) differ 
quite significantly from regular Windows Server containers.
```

They are run directly as processes on the host under the access policies of

> a user you specify. HostProcess containers run as either the built-in system accounts or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a user you specify. HostProcess containers run as either the built-in Windows system accounts or
```

ephemeral users within a user group defined by you. HostProcess containers also share
the host's network namespace and access/configure storage mounts visible to the host.
On the other hand, Windows Server containers are highly isolated and exist in a separate

> silo'd namespace. Direct access to the host from a Windows Server container is explicitly disallowed

Reviewer: I prefer:
```suggestion
execution namespace. Direct access to the host from a Windows Server container is explicitly disallowed
```

> by default. Mounting a host volume into the Windows Server container is highly discouraged to minimize
> potential attack surfaces. HostProcess containers enable you to configure the host such that communication
> with your Windows container workloads remains within the bounds of a secure pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by default. 

The Kubernetes project strongly recommends against mounting a host volume into a Windows Server
container in order to minimize potential attack surfaces. HostProcess containers enable you to configure 
the host, along with privileged helper Pods, so that communication with your Windows workloads
in containers happens within the bounds of a secure pipeline.
```

Author: After the suggested changes are committed I'll add a remark about how hostProcess containers are only allowed in the privileged pod-secrutiry standard profile and link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/#baseline

Until now, scenarios common to Linux privileged containers, such as kube-proxy (via kubeadm),
storage, and networking, all required proxy solutions to enable functionality on Windows.

> With HostProcess containers users have direct access to the node without the need for

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
With HostProcess containers, users have direct access to the node without the need for
```

any workarounds. Gone are the days where cluster operators would need to manually log onto

> Windows nodes to perform administrative duties - instead replaced with a continuous
> development pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Windows nodes to perform administrative duties.
```
We're not providing a CI/CD pipeline. You can explain how we're making it _possible_, though.

## How does it work?

Windows HostProcess containers are implemented with Windows _Job Objects_, a break from the
previous container model using server silos. Job objects are components of the Windows OS which offer the ability to

> manage a group of processes as a group (a.k.a. _jobs_) and assign resource constraints to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
manage a group of processes as a group (also known as a _job_) and assign resource constraints to the
```

Author: todo: link to https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/procthread/job-objects for more context

> group as a whole. Job objects are specific to the Windows OS and are not associated with the Kubernetes [Job API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/job/). They have no process or file system isolation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
group as a whole. Job objects are specific to the Windows OS and are not associated with
the Kubernetes [Job API](/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/job/). They have no process
or file system isolation,
```

enabling the privileged payload to view and edit the host file system with the
correct permissions, among other host resources. The init process, and any processes

> it launches or that are explicitly launched by the user, are all assigned to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it launches (including processes explicitly launched by the user) are all assigned to the
```

job object of that container. When the init process exits or is signaled to exit,
all the processes in the job will be signaled to exit, the job handle will be
closed and the storage will be unmounted.

HostProcess and Linux privileged containers enable similar scenarios but differ
greatly in their implementation (hence the naming difference). HostProcess containers

> have their own pod security policies. Those used to configure Linux privileged

Reviewer: Pod security policies? Not in Kubernetes 1.26 they don't. Maybe write “Pod-level security restrictions”

Reviewer 2: and maybe link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-admission/?

Author: I was thinking the same thing. Will update after reviewing suggested changed

containers **do not** apply. Enabling privileged access to a Windows host is a
fundamentally different process than with Linux so the configuration and
capabilities of each differ significantly. Below is a diagram detailing the
overall architecture of Windows HostProcess containers:

{{< figure src="hpc-architecture.png" alt="HostProcess Architecture" >}}

> Two major features were added prior to moving to stable: the ability to run as local user accounts, and
> a simplified method of accessing volume mounts. For more info visit our [updated documentation page](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/create-hostprocess-pod)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two major features were added prior to moving to stable: the ability to run as local user accounts, and
a simplified method of accessing volume mounts. To learn more, read
[Create a Windows HostProcess Pod](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/create-hostprocess-pod/).
```

Author: I'll also add a comment saying that InClusterConfig now works as a result of the volume mount changes. 
Lots of beta users were wanting this functionality.

> ## Use Cases

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
## Use cases
```

Reviewer 2: Reading through I thought I was going to learn about use cases such as "CNI's, kube-proxy, configuration management, etc"  but below is a list of projects using HPC's.  My consider renaming to something like "Hostprocess contianers in action" and making this section a bulleted list to make the projects stand out.

Reviewer: Either way works

> The SIG-Windows community has been busy putting HostProcess containers to use - even before GA! CThey've

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes SIG Windows has been busy putting HostProcess containers to use - even before GA!
They've
```
It's not a community, it's specifically a _special interest group_.

been very excited to use HostProcess containers for a number of important activities that were a pain to

> perform in the past. Now using HostProcess containers you can install the windows-exporter on your nodes

Reviewer: (nit)
I'd link to https://github.com/prometheus-community/windows_exporter

> and collect extremely detailed monitoring information with Prometheus. You can now run csi-proxy, flannel,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and collect extremely detailed metrics using an OpenMetrics monitoring component, such as Prometheus.
You can now run csi-proxy, flannel,
```

> calico, event loggers, and more as HPCs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calico, event loggers, and more as HostProcess pods.
```

> To see more HPC examples head over to [HostProcess Examples](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/sig-windows-tools/tree/master/hostprocess)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see more examples, look at the
[HostProcess examples](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/sig-windows-tools/tree/f366740c551b4217887a9eb339fd7ec3d6caacce/hostprocess)
that the Kubernetes project publishes on GitHub.
```

HPC is established jargon for “high performance computing”. Don't write “HPC” to mean “HostProcess Pods”

## How do I use it?

> A HostProcess container can be built using any base image of your choosing, however, for convenience we have
> created [a HostProcess container base image](https://github.com/microsoft/windows-host-process-containers-base-image).
> This image is only a few KB in size and does not inherit any of the same compatibility requirements as regular Windows
> server containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can build a container image for a HostProcess pod using any Windows base image
that you choose.
Microsoft have created a [HostProcess container base image](https://github.com/microsoft/windows-host-process-containers-base-image).
That Microsoft-maintained image is only a few KiB in size and does not inherit any of the same
compatibility requirements as regular Windows server containers.
```

> server containers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
server containers which allows it to run on any Windows server version.
```

> All you need in your Dockerfile is the following URI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use that Microsoft image, put this in your `Dockerfile`:
```
`mcr.microsoft.com/oss/kubernetes/windows-host-process-containers-base-image:v1.0.0` is not a URI, despite the insistence of Docker, Inc.

Author: According to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier I think this still qualifies as a URI.
It is not a URL tho

> A Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) is a unique sequence of characters that identifies a logical or physical resource used by web technologies. URIs may be used to identify anything, including real-world objects, such as people and places, concepts, or information resources such as web pages and books. Some URIs provide a means of locating and retrieving information resources on a network (either on the Internet or on another private network, such as a computer filesystem or an [Intranet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intranet)); these are [Uniform Resource Locators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Locator) (URLs). A URL provides the location of the resource.

```dockerfile
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/oss/kubernetes/windows-host-process-containers-base-image:v1.0.0
```

> HostProcess containers can be run from within a
> [HostProcess Pod](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/create-hostprocess-pod).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run HostProcess containers can be run from within a
[HostProcess Pod](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/#privileged-mode-for-containers).
```

> With the feature enabled on Kubernetes version 1.22, a containerd container runtime of
> 1.7 or higher, and the latest version of hcsshim, deploying a pod spec with the
> [correct HostProcess configuration](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/create-hostprocess-pod/#before-you-begin)
> will enable you to run HostProcess containers. To get started with running
> Windows containers see the general guidance for [Windows in Kubernetes](/docs/setup/production-environment/windows/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started with running Windows containers,
see the general guidance for [deploying Windows nodes](/docs/setup/production-environment/windows/). 
If you have a compatible node (for example: Windows as the operating system
containerd 1.7 or later, and hcsshim v0.9.5), you can deploy a Pod with one
or more HostProcess containers.
See the [prerequisites](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/create-hostprocess-pod/#before-you-begin)
in [Create a Windows HostProcess Pod](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/create-hostprocess-pod)
for more information.
Within a Pod, you can't mix HostProcess containers with normal Windows containers.
```

Author: I incorporated this suggestion in manually (I couldn't do it through the website)

> ## How can I learn more?

Reviewer 2: can and should we link to the talk Mark and I gave a Kubcon? https://youtu.be/LcXT9pVkwvo

Author: added!

---
layout: blog

> title: "Kubernetes 1.26: Windows HostProcess Containers Are Going Stable"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes 1.26: Windows HostProcess Containers Are Generally Available"
```

Author: updated

date: 2022-12-13

> slug: host-process-containers-stable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slug: windows-host-process-containers-ga
```
(`windows-` is for improved visibility to search engines)

Author: updated - thanks for the tip!

---

**Authors**: Brandon Smith (Microsoft) and Mark Rossetti (Microsoft)

The long-awaited day has arrived: HostProcess containers, the Windows equivalent to Linux privileged
containers, has finally made it to **GA in Kubernetes 1.26**!

What are HostProcess containers and why are they useful? Cluster operators
are often faced with the need to configure their nodes upon provisioning. Whether it's
installing services, certificates, network configs, device plugins, or even monitoring solutions like
installing Windows services, configuring registry keys and certificates for TLS, managing network configurations,
providing a [device plugin](/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/device-plugins/),

> or even deploying monitoring tools such as a Prometheus's node-exporter.

Reviewer: Please keep the wrapping if you can.

both administrative and development cost.
Gone are the days where cluster operators would need to manually log onto
Windows nodes to perform administrative duties.

[HostProcess containers](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/create-hostprocess-pod/) differ
quite significantly from regular Windows Server containers.
They are run directly as processes on the host under the access policies of
a user you specify. HostProcess containers run as either the built-in Windows system accounts or
ephemeral users within a user group defined by you. HostProcess containers also share
the host's network namespace and access/configure storage mounts visible to the host.
On the other hand, Windows Server containers are highly isolated and exist in a separate
execution namespace. Direct access to the host from a Windows Server container is explicitly disallowed
by default.

The Kubernetes project strongly recommends against mounting a host volume into a Windows Server
container in order to minimize potential attack surfaces. HostProcess containers enable you to configure
the host, along with privileged helper Pods, so that communication with your Windows workloads

> in containers happens within the bounds of a secure pipeline.

Reviewer: I agree, it's be nice to reword.

> in containers happens within the bounds of a secure pipeline.

Author: reworded - PTAL

They've been very excited to use HostProcess containers for a number of important activities
that were a pain to perform in the past.

Here are just a few of the many use use cases with example deployments:

- [CNI solutions and kube-proxy](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/sig-windows-tools/tree/master/hostprocess/calico#calico-example)
- [windows-exporter](https://github.com/prometheus-community/windows_exporter/blob/master/kubernetes/windows-exporter-daemonset.yaml)
- [csi-proxy](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/sig-windows-tools/tree/master/hostprocess/csi-proxy)
- [Windows-debug container](https://github.com/jsturtevant/windows-debug)
- [ETW event streaming](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/sig-windows-tools/tree/master/hostprocess/eventflow-logger)

## How do I use it?

A HostProcess container can be built using any base image of your choosing, however, for convenience we have
created [a HostProcess container base image](https://github.com/microsoft/windows-host-process-containers-base-image).
This image is only a few KB in size and does not inherit any of the same compatibility requirements as regular Windows

> server containers which allows it to run on any Windows server version.

Author: The README in the link pretty clearly states that - I don't think we need to restart it here.

> This image cannot be used with any other type of Windows container (process isolated, Hyper-V isolated, etc...)

To use that Microsoft image, put this in your `Dockerfile`:

```dockerfile
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/oss/kubernetes/windows-host-process-containers-base-image:v1.0.0
```

You can run HostProcess containers can be run from within a
[HostProcess Pod](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/#privileged-mode-for-containers).
To get started with running Windows containers,
see the general guidance for [deploying Windows nodes](/docs/setup/production-environment/windows/). 
If you have a compatible node (for example: Windows as the operating system

> containerd 1.7 or later, and hcsshim v0.9.5), you can deploy a Pod with one

Author: I'll remove the shim version because it is bundled in.

> containerd 1.7 or later, and hcsshim v0.9.5), you can deploy a Pod with one

Author: removed
